---
published: true
layout: post
---

In order to get real-time feedback from the users of your website, you need to use something other than just Python-Flask and HTML forms. This is because, while these two options work well they do require the page to be refreshed on every action that is taken. With SocketIO, you can forward the information from the client-side in real time.

One example of where SocketIO and real-time interaction comes in handy is a chat room. Chat rooms require that every time a message is sent to you it pops up on your screen without refreshing. This is also true when you send a message, with the page not refreshing on every sent message. This is what allows Facebook's messaging service to seem so fluid, along with every other instant messenger. In this post, I'll help explain some of the basics of SocketIO through the 

The first step to get started with SocketIO is to install the module through your terminal, and then import the library at the top of your Python server.py script.

	from flask.ext.socketio import SocketIO, emit, join_room, leave_room, send
    
After you have the correct imports, create an instance of socketIO on your server so you can get started.

	socketio = SocketIO(app)

It is important to note at this point that all of the real time interaction with the client will be done in Javascript, and then sent over to the Python code through defined functions. In order to get started with this, make sure you have a javascript file. Mine is called "controller.js". The first function I'll create is a simple "connected" function, to ensure that SocketIO is working and is connecting to the server code. The python function is simple, but has some formatted that is absolutely necessary to work correctly.


	@socketio.on('connect')
	def on_connect():
    	send('connected')
        
The "@socketio" distinguishes this as a socketIO function, and the 'connect' is the name of the function to the javascript side. When the javascript code calls a 'connect' function, it will be this one. Over in our controller.js file, we have a simmilar function called 'connect'.

	  socket.on('connect', function(){
       console.log('Connected');
       
    });
    
The idea here is that upon a successful connection, these functions will run and then inform the user that SocketIO is running correctly.

## Practical Application

Now that we have some idea how it works, let's try sending some user provided data to the server through socketIO. The first thing to get right is your HTML code, and correctly format your code so that any information entered in a form is sent to a function in your controller.js code rather than your server code itself. This is actually quite simple, and an example from my chat client is below.


	      <form ng-submit="send()">  
                <input type="text"  ng-model="text" size="30"  placeholder="...">
                <input type="submit"  value="Send" ng-disabled="!name" >
          </form>
          
You might notice that this is extremely similar to the HTML forms that we looked at in a previous post, however there are some key differences here. There is a defined function here which I am calling "send()", and that will be defined again in my controller.js file. OWhen the button is clicked, the text in the HTML form will be sent to a controller.js function that **must** be named "send()". 

	    $scope.send = function send(){
        console.log('Sending message to the server: ' +  $scope.text)
        socket.emit('message', $scope.text, $scope.userName, $scope.id);
        $scope.text = '';
    }
    


The next step for this text entered by the user is to the server code to be entered into my database. The code for this is really simple as well,




