---
published: true
layout: post
---
In order to keep track of user information long term, it is absolutely necessary to store it in some form of database. Some of the most popular options include MongoDB, SQL, mySQL, postgresql, cassandra, and the list goes on and on. For my entire semester in CPSC 350, I've used postgresql as my database of choice. Postgresql is similar to regular SQL, however it is a completely open source solution. By being open source, it allows for implementation in a multitude of computer languages. One such language is its python implementation. The postgresql library for python is called "psycopg2", and once downloaded is easily included in the header of the file.

The first step to correctly using postgresql is getting the database running on your server. Once the correct libraries have been installed, simply type: 

	sudo service postgresql start
    
into the terminal. This will start a database and also prompt you to create an account. Once your account is created, login to your client with the command

	psql -U postgres -h localhost

You will know you have successfully entered the postgresql terminal when you see the prompt 
	
    postgres=# 
    
Luckily, if you are familiar with SQL you will feel right at home with postgresql. The first step is to create a database. For this example, the database will be called "users". We will utilize the "create database" command in order to acheive this.

	CREATE DATABASE users;

This should create a database with the intended name. Next, you can direct your terminal to the database by typing "\c users;". Now, the only thing left to create the tabe in which your data is going to be physically stored in. The process of creating tables is nearly identical to SQL, which uses a "CREATE TABLE" command. For this example, I will show you the "CREATE TABLE" command that I used to make the table that holds the registration data in my database. 

	CREATE TABLE registered (
    	name varchar(20),
        address varchar(120),
        hosting varchar(5),
        moviename varchar(20),
        schoolyear integer,
        date date
    );

After running this command, you can view you newly created table by typing "\d registered;" in order to check for accuracy. 


### Accessing the Database From your Server Code

The next challenge is inserting and retrieving this code from your database. This is made extremely easy with the python libraries that exist for postgresql. The first step is creating a function that connects you to your database. The standard such function looks like this:

	def connectToDB():
    connectionString = 'dbname=hw1 user=postgres password=123password host=localhost'
    try:
        return psycopg2.connect(connectionString)
    except:
        print("Cant connect to database")
        
Next, you will need a pointer and a cursor in order to actually insert the material into the database, and to disconnect from the databse. 

	conn = connectToDB()
    cur = conn.cursor(cursor_factory=psycopg2.extras.DictCursor)
    
Now that we know how to retrieve data from the user with Flask, retrieving data and inserting it into the database will be easy. My function looks as follows.

	 cur.execute("""INSERT INTO registered (name, address, hosting, movieName, schoolYear, date)
     VALUES(%s, %s, %s, %s, %s, %s);""",
     (request.form['fname'], request.form['address'], request.form['hosting'],
     request.form['movie'], request.form['year'], request.form['date']) )

You can test if this works as intended by querying your database to see if anything has been inserted, or if an exception is thrown. (Hint -  Always place any database query in a try catch block)









    
 
    
    
